[Amit Varma]: One question that all of us have asked ourselves about our own lives is the question, what
[Amit Varma]: if?
[Amit Varma]: What if I had done this instead of that?
[Amit Varma]: What if I had chosen another career?
[Amit Varma]: What if I had lived in a different city or not gone on that first date, or was just born
[Amit Varma]: in a different family?
[Amit Varma]: What if?
[Amit Varma]: There's a universe of possibilities in just those words.
[Amit Varma]: And our fascination with those words extends beyond our own lives.
[Amit Varma]: What if the world was a different place?
[Amit Varma]: We apply this to history sometimes, and that can be a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: The world is complex, but we tell ourselves simple stories to make sense of it.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, the past has many layers, and we build simple histories to make sense of it.
[Amit Varma]: For this reason, what if questions often don't work?
[Amit Varma]: Changing one variable in a complex world may not change much at all.
[Amit Varma]: But what if that variable is a big variable?
[Amit Varma]: What if that variable is a Mughal emperor?
[Amit Varma]: If a tolerant and intellectually curious religious scholar had become Mughal emperor instead
[Amit Varma]: of an orthodox, bigoted, violent man, would history have proceeded differently?
[Amit Varma]: If Dara Shikoh had become emperor instead of his younger brother Aurangzeb, would India
[Unknown]: be a different place today?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today, the historian Supriya Gandhi, once said that she saw one
[Amit Varma]: of her tasks as making history complex again.
[Amit Varma]: While the pursuit of history might be driven by the need to build narratives that explain
[Amit Varma]: the world, and those narratives are always simpler than the real world, it could be argued
[Amit Varma]: that the stories we have of the past today in India are just too damn simple.
[Amit Varma]: Such as the one I mentioned a few moments ago about Dara Shikoh and Aurangzeb.
[Amit Varma]: We like to think of them in the stark binaries I mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: Dara as a tolerant and intellectually curious religious scholar, and Aurangzeb as a brutal
[Amit Varma]: bigot.
[Amit Varma]: But these are caricatures, and both men were far more complex than these glib descriptions
[Amit Varma]: can capture.
[Amit Varma]: Another false binary is the one between tolerant Sufism and rigid orthodox Islam.
[Amit Varma]: Also a simplistic view that misses the complexities of Islam in India.
[Amit Varma]: To better understand those complexities, I recommend you read The Emperor Who Never Was
[Amit Varma]: Dara Shikoh in Mughal India by Supriya Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: This is a marvellous human portrait of Dara Shikoh that gives a deep sense of what a complex
[Amit Varma]: man he was, and which also shows us the complex times he lived in.
[Amit Varma]: There is a popular narrative today that talks about how India would be so different if Dara
[Amit Varma]: had been emperor instead of Aurangzeb.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok Malik even called the murder of Dara Shikoh, quote, the partition before partition,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Supriya's book gives me the sense that, well, maybe we are overthinking it.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it won't have been that different.
[Amit Varma]: And certainly we would all still have been coping with lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: Before we head on over to the conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: And that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of The Scene and The Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: sceneunseen.in slash support Supriya, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin, you know, I'd like to know a little bit about your sort of intellectual
[Amit Varma]: and academic journey.
[Amit Varma]: Like how did you get into the field that you are in?
[Amit Varma]: You majored in religious studies, you teach religious studies at Yale.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what drew you to this field?
[Amit Varma]: And who was sort of your intellectual influences while you were growing as an intellectual?
[Guest]: Religious studies is a field that is far more commonly encountered in the United States.
[Guest]: And it's sometimes confused with theology or divinity studies.
[Guest]: Religious studies is studying about religion.
[Guest]: It isn't comparing religions to see what the best religion is.
[Guest]: Neither is it training people to become priests or chaplains or whatever.
[Guest]: And I actually haven't really studied religion very much formally.
[Guest]: But my interest in this and my whole intellectual trajectory was shaped by growing up in India.
[Guest]: I changed schools a number of times, I went to a boarding school.
[Guest]: And then finally, when I turned 17, I landed in Delhi to go to college, I went to St. Stephen's
[Guest]: College.
[Guest]: And for me, my educational experience wasn't just the college and the people I encountered
[Guest]: there and my teachers, of course, that they were also very important.
[Guest]: It was exploring an Indian city as an adult, especially a city like Delhi with all the
[Guest]: layers of history and histories of people, migrations, etc., associated with it.
[Guest]: So I would enjoy exploring Old Delhi.
[Guest]: And one day I came across near Ajmeri Gate, the Ghazi-ud-Din Madrasa, which seemed to
[Guest]: be just a beautiful building.
[Guest]: It was utterly quiet, full of the sound of birds.
[Guest]: And I was there with a couple of friends and we just started wandering around.
[Guest]: And then we were accosted by somebody.
[Guest]: And I thought he was going to tell us off, that he was going to rebuke us and say, get
[Guest]: out of here.
[Guest]: And instead, he said, he asked if we had come to see Dr. Joffrey.
[Guest]: And at that point, I wasn't quite sure who he was.
[Guest]: And then he introduced himself as Dr. Yunus Joffrey, the Persian professor, and no doubt
[Guest]: he was very used to having all kinds of people making a pilgrimage to see him.
[Guest]: And it turned out he'd been profiled in William Dalrymple's book, City of Djinns.
[Guest]: So Dr. Joffrey invited us to his little room, his little cell, and he served us delicious
[Guest]: chai and offered to teach us Persian.
[Guest]: And I was the only one among our friends who took him up on the offer and I started learning
[Guest]: the alphabet.
[Guest]: And I thought this would be a wonderful opportunity to read the poetry of Rumi, about whom I'd
[Guest]: heard, of course.
[Guest]: So with Dr. Joffrey and my explanations of Delhi, I got my initial introduction into
[Guest]: a language and a history that was very, very much part of the education of most educated
[Guest]: people in North India at one point in time, but that had been excised from my own curriculum.
[Guest]: So it was a fascinating complement to my studies of philosophy, which I pursued at St. Stephen's.
[Guest]: And I had an equal interest in Indian philosophy, Sanskrit philosophy, the Sikh Darshanas, and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And after this, after my studies, I was going to either spend a year in Benares doing Sanskrit
[Guest]: or spend a year in Iran doing Persian.
[Guest]: And the year in Iran worked out, so I landed up there.
[Guest]: I wanted to do something different.
[Guest]: It's quite common for people from my college to, if they got good marks and so on, to want
[Guest]: to go to Oxford and Cambridge, and that idea didn't really attract me.
[Guest]: I wanted to do something that didn't really have so much to do with an education in the
[Guest]: West, not immediately.
[Guest]: So that year in Iran led to lots of other things.
[Guest]: I was immersed in the study of Persian.
[Guest]: I got to see a fascinating side of Iran that isn't really covered in the Western press.
[Guest]: Studying in India is a huge advantage, just immense hospitality and warmth that I received
[Guest]: over there.
[Guest]: And I got to see this amazing, very vibrant intellectual culture, some of it underground,
[Guest]: some of it not so much, this long street of books in Taiwan that is probably one of the
[Guest]: longest streets for bookshops in the world, students discussing philosophy and ideas,
[Guest]: an immense amount of intellectual curiosity.
[Guest]: So what I wanted to do then was to take what I had learned in Iran of the Persian language,
[Guest]: philosophy, Sufism, and so on, and apply that back to India, because then I discovered that
[Guest]: there were all these texts that were waiting to be read.
[Guest]: I started hearing about Raghunath Shukla, although I didn't know that I was later going
[Guest]: to work on him, and all the Persian translations of Sanskrit works at Akbar's court and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: So I had the skill, and I might as well put it to use, but not just yet.
[Guest]: So I continued my studies.
[Guest]: I got a master's degree in London in Middle Eastern studies, and I started Arabic.
[Guest]: I spent a year in Syria, I spent a year immersing myself in Arabic and the study of the Islamic
[Guest]: sciences through Arabic.
[Guest]: And that was very, very different Syria to the war-torn, ravaged country that it is now
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So that also was a wonderful experience.
[Guest]: And then I realized that I had to pursue a PhD in the United States, where you have the
[Guest]: advantage of being able to fund your studies, you get paid to study and teach if you get
[Guest]: admission.
[Guest]: So that's what I did, and so that's where I've ended up now.
[Guest]: So my PhD was really in area studies, but I ended up working on topics that give me
[Guest]: a common vocabulary and common interests with those in the study of religion.
[Amit Varma]: So that's where I've ended up right now.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, it's fascinating that you often warned against looking at, you know, history
[Amit Varma]: in terms of simple narratives, but you know, while you were telling the story, it almost
[Amit Varma]: seemed as if it if it wasn't for that serendipitous meeting with Dr. Joffrey in the ruins and
[Amit Varma]: him offering to sort of teach you Persian, this whole journey may not have happened.
[Amit Varma]: Is that kind of true?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you have a prior interest in all of these areas anyway, in terms of history and,
[Guest]: you know, languages and so on?
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Well, you know, it's a little hard to go back and do a counterfactual autobiography to see
[Guest]: what might have happened had I not met Dr. Joffrey.
[Guest]: But I think my interest in exploring Old Delhi did stem from my curiosity about, about these
[Guest]: aspects that at least one part of my own school curriculum, and that were very much part of
[Guest]: my exploring the city around me.
[Amit Varma]: So it might have happened.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, did you sort of have a specific vision of yourself in the future
[Amit Varma]: that I want to study history or write books of history or so on?
[Amit Varma]: Or were you just sort of going with your passions and going with your interests and letting
[Guest]: them lead you where they would?
[Guest]: I had no specific career plans.
[Guest]: My boarding school was founded by J. Krishnamurti, it was in South India, and we were encouraged
[Guest]: to do things for the sake of it.
[Guest]: It wasn't like kind of typical Indian school with rankings and like people having people
[Guest]: really eager to do competitive exams.
[Guest]: Of course, one's very lucky and privileged to be to be free of that.
[Guest]: But no, I was I was not thinking instrumentally in any way I was following my interests.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it sort of strikes me that, you know, did studying Persian and did for
[Amit Varma]: example, spending time in Iran and Syria and all of that, give you a window into aspects
[Amit Varma]: of India and Indian culture, which are otherwise invisible to us, for example, we know that
[Amit Varma]: there is a lot of Persian influence in our language, in our culture, in our cooking and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, except that is, you know, we've internalized it and we don't think of ourselves
[Amit Varma]: in that way.
[Amit Varma]: Many of us don't think of ourselves as the sort of melting pot that we are where all
[Amit Varma]: these influences exist.
[Amit Varma]: So did you feel that your understanding of India itself, our culture, our language, all
[Amit Varma]: of that deepened because you were going deeper into say, the influences of Persian as a language
[Amit Varma]: and then maybe influences from Iran as a culture because those exist as well?
[Amit Varma]: Did that make you sort of see the unseen, in a sense, which many of us would otherwise
[Guest]: miss out on?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think definitely.
[Guest]: So and you know, I consider myself very much still a student of India and Indian history,
[Guest]: you know, I find it endlessly fascinating.
[Guest]: Yes, my studies of Persian, for instance, helped me see all the Persian words that existed
[Guest]: in Hindustani and Indian languages, the influences, whether it's cuisine, poetry, language, and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: You know, had I grown up in Lucknow, for instance, you know, I might have been more steeped in
[Guest]: that, but I spent a lot of my life in South India and in, you know, in fairly, you know,
[Guest]: insulated environments.
[Guest]: So absolutely, I got a completely different perspective on India, through my studies in
[Amit Varma]: Iran and in Syria.
[Amit Varma]: And is it sort of, you know, when you start studying history, given that, especially when
[Amit Varma]: you study the Mughals, right, there are such set narratives about the Mughals that are
[Amit Varma]: already there.
[Amit Varma]: And when you, you know, start studying a period in history, how difficult is it to put the
[Amit Varma]: hindsight bias away?
[Amit Varma]: Because there's no mystery, right?
[Amit Varma]: We already know everything that has happened in terms of the events that have taken place.
[Amit Varma]: And for those specific times, there are very few sources, often those sources will tend
[Amit Varma]: to be biased sources, like the winners will write their own history, and Aurangzeb obviously
[Amit Varma]: will want to, you know, paint Dara Shikoh in whatever way is convenient to him.
[Amit Varma]: So how difficult is it to then be able to say that, you know, regardless of what period
[Amit Varma]: of history you're studying, how difficult is it to sort of strip all of that away the
[Amit Varma]: things that you know, the narratives that are almost reflexive to us, and be able to
[Amit Varma]: sort of figure out things in a contemporary way, like one of the things that struck me
[Amit Varma]: while reading your book, which was so different from everything that we've sort of learned
[Amit Varma]: about Dara Shikoh and Aurangzeb, apart from obviously the false binaries, which we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss later.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that kind of struck me was that sense throughout the book that
[Amit Varma]: Dara Shikoh is really in training to be an emperor, it's it's almost it seems foredeigned
[Amit Varma]: and he is behaving as if he is going to be the emperor, he's almost co ruling with his
[Amit Varma]: father in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And then one day it all falls apart and Aurangzeb is a, you know, a bit player in all of this
[Amit Varma]: going off to the deck and going off there going off here.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when we typically look at history, we think of what we're taught in our textbooks,
[Amit Varma]: these are the great emperors, you know, after Shah Jahan, there's Aurangzeb and it's a very
[Amit Varma]: different look.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you do that?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you have to consciously tell yourself that look, I have to avoid these
[Amit Varma]: dominant narratives, I have to, you know, look at each period and each event as if I
[Amit Varma]: don't know what is happening next?
[Guest]: Is that a discipline you have to build?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: And actually, to an extent, that is sort of the methodology that I've followed in this
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: Initially, I was, I was reluctant to choose Dara Shikoh, partly because he's so well known.
[Guest]: He's not as well known as Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: But the story of Dara Shikoh and Aurangzeb is sort of like a foundational origin story
[Guest]: of the subcontinent explaining how we got where we are today.
[Guest]: So I was a bit hesitant about doing that.
[Guest]: Because there's also a lot of merit in looking at the histories of people who don't have
[Guest]: written histories.
[Guest]: There are many, many ways in which one can look at this, this early modern period, addressing
[Guest]: themes and processes and so on.
[Guest]: And in the end, I found that I couldn't really leave Dara, partly because he's such a prominent
[Guest]: figure today.
[Guest]: You know, I say in my introduction, that these Mughal royals, most of them emperors, but
[Guest]: some others also still live among us.
[Guest]: We feel we know them, we feel that they're just so familiar, you just need to call someone
[Guest]: Aurangzeb, you know, in India, and you know that it's a slur, you know, it's something
[Guest]: like, you know, you're saying something really nasty about them, they're treacherous, they're
[Guest]: not loyal to their families, and so on.
[Guest]: But having looked at Mughal primary sources, I knew that the story was much more complicated
[Guest]: than that.
[Guest]: So I think if one dips one's feet in the water of the Persian sources of the time, sources
[Guest]: in other languages, you do get the sense that things are very different.
[Guest]: And then there's another kind of principle, a methodological principle of writing history
[Guest]: that are used, which was to try to look at the sources that were contemporaneous with
[Guest]: Dara, or that if one looks at later sources to make sure that you know that, to make sure
[Guest]: that you're sort of disclosing that these are later sources, these are written by people
[Guest]: who are not eyewitnesses, who are not contemporaries.
[Guest]: And you know, they might have another axe to grind, they might have, there's definitely
[Guest]: covered by either being written in Aurangzeb's time, or later with the benefit of hindsight.
[Guest]: So that it definitely tells you a lot about the period in which those sources were written.
[Guest]: But we want to know how Dara was representing himself, again, you know, once being quite
[Guest]: careful about avoiding any, just any kernel of core historical truth, because what you
[Guest]: have is just a new way of representations.
[Guest]: And if we look at the representations from that period, what are they saying?
[Guest]: What are they telling us?
[Guest]: So that's the question that I kept in mind when I was doing my research.
[Amit Varma]: And what drew you to the project to begin with?
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, it's a very resonant story, the Dara versus Aurangzeb, it's almost a foundational
[Amit Varma]: story of Islam in the subcontinent in many senses.
[Amit Varma]: So were you sort of drawn into exploring that further?
[Amit Varma]: Or during your readings, did you find that, wait a minute, this guy is much more complicated
[Amit Varma]: than all of this, and I need to dig into this deeper, like, which came first, you're choosing
[Amit Varma]: the story or the story choosing you as it were?
[Guest]: So I think what came first was what I did during my doctoral studies, my PhD studies
[Guest]: at Harvard, I wanted to study some aspect of the Sanskrit Persian encounter.
[Guest]: And I found that I couldn't really avoid Dara Shukoh.
[Guest]: He is such a central figure after Akbar.
[Guest]: I mean, he is a Mughal royal who's producing his own translations, with help of course
[Guest]: and collaboration.
[Guest]: And that I found that people were reading his writings later on.
[Guest]: So he had this really long, diachronic influence.
[Guest]: And he was such a key figure.
[Guest]: So I started just looking at the works that he wrote, you know, I did a fresh translation
[Guest]: of the Majnul Bahrain that I'm sitting on, I haven't published that yet.
[Guest]: And I looked at his Surya Akbar and so on.
[Guest]: And then later on, when I wanted to write a book, I realized that I have to place this
[Guest]: in its social and political context.
[Guest]: So the book is, you know, it's quite, quite different from what I did during my, my PhD.
[Guest]: But my initial attraction was just to look at Dara Shukoh, you know, he was, he's just
[Guest]: this amazingly prolific figure, and to sort of to see, to look at his intellectual trajectory
[Guest]: to see, you know, how he was developing his thought and his ideas.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in a recent interview, which of course I linked from the show notes, you said
[Amit Varma]: something I found very interesting, which is that the narrative task of a historian
[Amit Varma]: is to make history complex again, which of course speaks to how in trying to make sense
[Amit Varma]: of the world, we necessarily have to come up with simple narratives for everything.
[Amit Varma]: And very often, when we look at history, these simple narratives are convenient, simple narratives
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that they bolster whatever our vision of the world is, in fact, you quoted
[Amit Varma]: Baths in your book, and you said that, you know, you invoked his saying history evaporates.
[Amit Varma]: And you said that, in your words, quote, myth also clads ideological structures in a narrative
[Amit Varma]: form, stop quote, and obviously, there are very deeper entrenched narratives that are
[Amit Varma]: at play here.
[Amit Varma]: And now when you get into it, it's almost as if and you also chose a narrative form,
[Amit Varma]: which I suppose, in some senses was meant to reach out to a broader than academic readership.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, you want to also tell a compelling story, which you think is, you know, different
[Amit Varma]: from the simple narratives which previously exist.
[Amit Varma]: But where do you maintain that balance of sort of being complex and being coherent?
[Amit Varma]: Was that a challenge? And was it also a challenge that there is so little material to play with
[Amit Varma]: that you're being forced to make choices?
[Amit Varma]: And are those choices something that you're then examining why you're making those choices?
[Guest]: Yes, of course, you know, there are a lot of choices involved in one's telling of the
[Guest]: story, for instance, you know, so this is so this book, it is a narrative.
[Guest]: It's a retelling of the simple myth of Tara Shukla and Aurangzeb and as you know, as you
[Guest]: mentioned, I'm calling this a myth, not because I'm saying it's not true, but because these
[Guest]: are stories that live with us, they live with us, there are ciphers and sort of short forms
[Guest]: for a whole range of ideas and ideological positions.
[Guest]: So when I'm turning this into a story, I am making choices about what to include what
[Guest]: to say.
[Guest]: And I think that's something that happens no matter what kind of book you write.
[Guest]: One could write a more conventional academic sort of book, the kind of book that has an
[Guest]: introduction with a chapter outline, and a conclusion sort of summing up these things
[Guest]: and and, you know, perhaps some thematic chapters, and you're still making choices, you're making
[Guest]: choices about, about what to include what fits in with your argument, what doesn't necessarily
[Guest]: address your argument, what isn't so useful to you.
[Guest]: And in this case, I chose to present my argument in the form of a narrative, so doing more
[Guest]: showing than telling, though, of course, there is definitely some telling that goes on.
[Guest]: But what this book isn't, it isn't a grab bag of every single fact in the world about
[Guest]: Tara Shukla and Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: And that's partly because, you know, no publisher would really want to publish something like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: There are word limits, there are, you know, all kinds of things that have to be negotiated.
[Guest]: So if you want to book, you know, something between two covers that can reach a fairly
[Guest]: wide audience, there are there are always choices that one needs.
[Amit Varma]: And what were your sort of models in terms of books which attempted a similar thing a
[Amit Varma]: show don't tell approach with a distant period of history, you know, a very serious book
[Amit Varma]: written with a lot of rigor, but told in a narrative style that can, you know, appeal
[Amit Varma]: to larger audiences.
[Amit Varma]: So who were the sort of writers of history who you admired and learned from?
[Guest]: So that's a great question.
[Guest]: And I didn't have a whole lot of models from this period of South Asian history.
[Guest]: You know, loads of historians whom I admire, of course.
[Guest]: But when I was writing this, you know, I didn't have a precise model.
[Guest]: It's not as though this is a genre.
[Guest]: It so happened that as I was writing the book, and as it was in production, there was a whole
[Guest]: slew of of mobile biographies that that came out, some by academic colleagues, one or two,
[Guest]: and a lot of them by other writers in South Asia, which I think is a is a wonderful trend.
[Guest]: There wasn't a whole lot, you know, I can just think of the top of my head of, you know,
[Guest]: some, some writers whom I read, you know, there is the American historian Jim Lepore,
[Guest]: who writes very prolific essays for the New Yorker and also other books.
[Guest]: And, again, she has this amazing gift for narrative history and kind of lucid prose.
[Guest]: So she's, she's one author whom I have been reading, you know, and I've also been really
[Guest]: impressed by Shamsur Rehman Farooqui's sort of luxuriant novels that really bring to life
[Guest]: the times that they talk about, and there are all these intricate narrative threads
[Guest]: and characters woven in.
[Guest]: So that, you know, was another sort of indirect influence.
[Guest]: You know, I was drawing inspiration from novelists as much as from historians, except that, you
[Guest]: know, I was trying to piece together this narrative after being really steeped in the
[Guest]: primary sources of the era.
[Guest]: So I had to construct something that I hoped would read a bit like a novel, except that
[Guest]: it was all nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: In the introduction to your book, you sort of pointed out about how you were at first
[Amit Varma]: hesitant about writing it, because you didn't want to, you know, privilege this whole great
[Amit Varma]: men sort of way of history, and so much of the narrative around Dara is actually a great
[Amit Varma]: man narrative that had he been emperor instead of Aurangzeb, the entire subcontinent would
[Amit Varma]: have proceeded in a different direction.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I kind of like to ask the historians who come on the show that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where do you stand in the great man theory of history?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I'd be interested in having you elaborate on that.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So the thing about, you know, great men is that we tend to really love them in the present
[Guest]: moment.
[Guest]: That's how we tend to look at history.
[Guest]: So in the popular imagination in South Asia, history is this succession of either great
[Guest]: men or depraved men who, you know, had tremendous control over steering its course and so on.
[Guest]: So if you write about someone, it must mean that you sort of, you know, like greatly admire
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And, you know, I do, I do have empathy for Dara Shukla, I feel that, you know, I've tried
[Guest]: to understand things from his perspective and there are lots of things I like about
[Guest]: him, but I would be very hesitant to elevate him or any Mughal emperor for that matter
[Guest]: to this great man status.
[Guest]: So I'll just talk about my hesitancy for a bit, and then I'll go back to why I still
[Guest]: think it's important to study these figures.
[Guest]: I'm hesitant because the Mughal Empire was about a whole lot more than just the emperor
[Guest]: and the court.
[Guest]: It was a fairly loose-knit empire.
[Guest]: It was held together by a whole array of nobility, chieftains, and so on, who were really masters
[Guest]: of their own domains.
[Guest]: The emperor was still important as a figurehead and as an idea.
[Guest]: Dara Shukla, you know, lived during the period where the idea of the sacred sovereign was
[Guest]: really at its height, so yes, you know, the idea of this all-powerful emperor who is responsible
[Guest]: for keeping the whole, the empire in a state of harmony and balance was very important.
[Guest]: And yet our obsession with great men can obscure us to broader facts of cultural process that
[Guest]: exist quite separately, quite independent of the actions of emperors.
[Guest]: There are a whole range of environmental changes, for instance, that are taking place that also
[Guest]: have an impact on where people live, what religion they might choose, and so on.
[Guest]: Richard Eaton's work on Bengal is a case in point.
[Guest]: So there are a whole range of other factors that are far more important than men.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, there is the gender dimension that our focus on men has obscured
[Guest]: the important role of women and others in history.
[Guest]: But still, it's hard to get away from these figures because I think it's important to
[Guest]: study them in their complexity as well.
[Guest]: And for Dara Shukoh, his influence ranges far beyond his time.
[Guest]: In fact, my current work, which we can speak about in a bit, partly addresses how people
[Guest]: were reading Dara Shukoh much after his death and how his own studies of Indic thought spawned
[Guest]: all kinds of other intellectual debates, changes, and dialogues that he couldn't even have predicted.
[Guest]: So if you're looking at the section of elite society in pre-modern and even in colonial
[Guest]: India, the small section that was literate, or a larger section that was kind of literate
[Guest]: aware, figures like Dara Shukoh do tend to have an important reach.
[Guest]: And they also remind us that what happened at the court wasn't something that was just
[Guest]: purely located in that context, that what happened at the court was informed by other
[Guest]: intellectual conversations, dialogues, cultural processes that were taking place outside the
[Guest]: court.
[Guest]: So Dara Shukoh wasn't alone, it wasn't just that he invented inter-religious dialogue.
[Guest]: He was participating in something that took place in many other venues as well.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, one of the things that I have got a sense of in the past few months by reading
[Amit Varma]: books like yours and Ira Mukherjee's book, and she was also on the show a while back,
[Amit Varma]: and Mani Mukta Sharma and so on, is that, you know, we think of these as almost caricature
[Amit Varma]: figures that Aurangzeb is this evil bigoted guy and Dara Shukoh is this tolerant secular
[Amit Varma]: guy.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, you know, the emperor wasn't the be-all and end-all of the empire, there
[Amit Varma]: was a deep state, there was a political economy in which the women of the harems were deeply
[Amit Varma]: involved.
[Amit Varma]: And also, as we'll discuss shortly, these binaries also don't hold true in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that Aurangzeb was also to an extent steeped in culture and engaging with the world and
[Amit Varma]: if Dara Shukoh had come to power, he would probably have beheaded his brothers as well.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it's not that things would have necessarily been as different as we try to
[Amit Varma]: make it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my friend Ashok Malik once wrote a piece where he called, you know, the execution
[Amit Varma]: of Dara Shukoh, the partition before partition, which you've sort of cited in your book, and
[Amit Varma]: I was, you know, which is almost emblematic of these definitive, simplistic takes that
[Amit Varma]: one draw of these.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also, you know, struck by, and I'll quote this bit from your book, because it
[Amit Varma]: overall seems to sum up how the binaries play out where you talk about the trial of Dara
[Amit Varma]: Shukoh and you write, quote, the trial is a powerful motif because it transforms a story
[Amit Varma]: about 17th century India into a narrative about today.
[Amit Varma]: It creates a dialectic between two opposing visions of Islam.
[Amit Varma]: Islam is zealous extremism immediately familiar in our present context.
[Amit Varma]: And it's counterpoint Islam as Sufi antinomianism.
[Amit Varma]: But even without the supposed trial, the brothers clash is a story that addresses the deepest
[Amit Varma]: questions of who we are and how we got here.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you also relate in your book about how through history we look at these two very
[Amit Varma]: divergent views of say Aurangzeb and Dara Shukoh where Muhammad Iqbal and Rumuzi Bekhudi
[Amit Varma]: praises Aurangzeb as, you know, that ascetic, that sword master and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Ashok Malik calls it the partition before partition.
[Amit Varma]: But equally on the other side, you have, you know, the two 20th century bios of Dara that
[Amit Varma]: you've referred to by Kalik Ranjan Kanungo and Vikramjeet Hasrat, where both of them
[Amit Varma]: praise him.
[Amit Varma]: And Kanungo says the world has not become richer in any way by the long reign of Aurangzeb,
[Amit Varma]: but it would certainly have been poorer without Dara Shukoh.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And one, of course, we'll talk about how these binaries aren't true.
[Amit Varma]: But the question that struck me while I was reading these is that at some point in our
[Amit Varma]: history, what is happening, and I think it happened repeatedly over the late 19th century
[Amit Varma]: and the early 20th century, is that these conflicting ideas of Islam are competing with
[Amit Varma]: the conflicting ideas of India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as in, where does a lot of the debates that were playing out, you know, where does
[Amit Varma]: the good Muslim stand with relation to his fealty towards India?
[Amit Varma]: This was part of the reason why, for example, you know, Mahatma Gandhi's alliance with the
[Amit Varma]: Ali brothers at the time of the Khilafat movement seems so discordant, because, you know, while
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi is fighting for a vision of India as a nation state, per se, the Ali brothers are
[Amit Varma]: fighting for a larger Ummah where your allegiance is to somewhere else entirely.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts also on how these competing ideas of Islam have played
[Amit Varma]: out against the competing ideas of India?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I realize this is a sort of a larger question than, you know, what your book is
[Amit Varma]: about.
[Amit Varma]: But because that's, of course, set in those Mughal times, but I'd love to know what thoughts
[Guest]: you've had on these.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So thank you.
[Guest]: So, you know, of course, the Khilafat movement is very, very modern.
[Guest]: It comes at a time when ideas of Islam are changing.
[Guest]: And there is this kind of political Islam that is forming in opposition to colonialism.
[Guest]: You know, there is a Muslim public sphere, there's a Hindu public sphere.
[Guest]: So colonialism played an important role in transforming how these communities drew boundaries
[Guest]: around their identities, how they saw each other, how they saw their role.
[Guest]: In the case of Dara Shukoh, yes, it's depending on which side of the border you're on or what
[Guest]: ideology you gravitate towards, you know, Dara Shukoh is either this terrible heretic,
[Guest]: you know, it was like just as well that Aurangzeb got him out of the way.
[Guest]: You see this in a lot of narratives from Pakistan, not all, but at all, you know, not kind of
[Guest]: more state-sponsored narratives, or Dara Shukoh is this wonderful philosopher and gentle mystic
[Guest]: who really ought to have been ruler.
[Guest]: But there's always a caveat, there's always a little bit of doubt with that, because even
[Guest]: those, like his wonderful earlier 20th century biographers, Phanungo and Hester, even those
[Guest]: who praise him, they still feel, well, you know, he was, yes, he had these amazing views
[Guest]: and was interested in Sanskrit and Indic thought, but there was actually no way he could really
[Guest]: practically rule.
[Guest]: He was too weak, he was uninterested in the throne, and you really needed someone more
[Guest]: ruthless like Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: So it was inevitable that somebody who was more crafty, who was more capable of being
[Amit Varma]: the emperor.
[Amit Varma]: And this, as you've pointed out, is not the truth, obviously, I mean, that whole binary
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, Dara had his head in the clouds, and he was just doing all these religious
[Amit Varma]: studies and meeting Sufi saints, and Aurangzeb was the guy who was going out and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: conquering territories and all that isn't true at all.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Dara was Shah Jahan's chosen successor, in a sense, and they almost co-ruled
[Amit Varma]: for many, many years.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, when people asked that hypothetical question of what would Dara have been as a
[Amit Varma]: ruler, what you've pointed out is that we already kind of know.
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: So, you know, one thing that I've tried to do is to disturb the idea that that's a very
[Guest]: modern idea, that a ruler should not be interested in philosophy, that a ruler should, you know,
[Guest]: is not really the kind of person to have dialogues with ascetics, that belongs to a totally different
[Guest]: realm of life, and it's not part of an emperor or would-be emperor's political relations.
[Guest]: And I've tried to show how Dara wasn't an outlier in this regard, he was actually following
[Guest]: an established Mughal tradition.
[Guest]: He was, without acknowledging them, following in the footsteps of his great-grandfather
[Guest]: Akbar and, to an extent as well, his own grandfather Jahangir, that he complemented his own father
[Guest]: Shah Jahan, who was often viewed as somebody who was more orthodox, he was paving the way
[Guest]: for Aurangzeb's far, you know, stricter, more ascetic orthodox rule.
[Guest]: But Dara and Shah Jahan together were hosting Sanskrit pundits at the court who composed
[Guest]: poems in praise of them, you know, he was hosting all these intellectual and spiritual
[Guest]: dialogues and was very, very much part of what he was doing as a ruler, he certainly
[Guest]: saw himself as one.
[Guest]: Now Aurangzeb did have an advantage, Aurangzeb had the advantage of gaining a lot of military
[Guest]: experience on his own, often in the face of, you know, either opposition and really irritating
[Guest]: micromanaging on the part of Shah Jahan.
[Guest]: He was able to govern the Deccan as well on his own, so he got a lot of independent experience
[Guest]: that served him well in the struggle for the throne later on.
[Guest]: But it doesn't mean that, you know, Dara Shukrawal didn't prove himself as a future
[Amit Varma]: emperor.
[Amit Varma]: No, I was, in fact, you mentioned micromanaging and there are these very funny bits in your
[Amit Varma]: book, which are again, perfect examples of show don't tell and I love the bit about the
[Amit Varma]: mangoes where, you know, Aurangzeb I think is in Aurangabad and he's got to send and
[Amit Varma]: his dad is waiting for mangoes because it's Aurangzeb's duty to send him the mangoes as
[Amit Varma]: soon as the first good ones come.
[Amit Varma]: So Shah Jahan writes him a letter and says, have people stand below the tree, I can't
[Amit Varma]: wait as soon as they come, they got to catch them as they fall.
[Amit Varma]: Aurangzeb sends him mangoes and Shah Jahan replies that these are shitty mangoes and
[Amit Varma]: have you eaten my good mangoes and Aurangzeb has to reply that no, your highness, I would
[Amit Varma]: not dare to eat.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there's a more consequential version of this during the Kandahar battle
[Amit Varma]: where you point out about how they are laying siege to Kandahar, which the Safaites have
[Amit Varma]: taken over and Aurangzeb who is on the ground who can see the conditions realizes that the
[Amit Varma]: artillery is useless and he's in line with the suggestion that let's just attack from
[Amit Varma]: one point and focus there.
[Amit Varma]: And he tells his dad and Papa Shah Jahan, you know, doing central planning from hundreds
[Amit Varma]: of miles away says no, no, we, you know, use those cannons and we'll, you know, attack
[Amit Varma]: from two places and he seems like such an, you know, must be such an irritating dad to
[Amit Varma]: have to deal with for Aurangzeb, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And since we're talking about sort of Shah Jahan, I found a really interesting character
[Amit Varma]: because there are just so many sides to his persona that you can really paint him as anything
[Amit Varma]: like you've pointed out, you know, his journey to the throne, of course, is incredibly bloody
[Amit Varma]: where he has to get rid of all his brothers and nephews and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, you have the softer, more sensuous side of him, partly reflected, of
[Amit Varma]: course, in his deep love for his wife and, you know, the good deeds that he does.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you point out an example of what, you know, today, I'm sure many people would jump
[Amit Varma]: on where in 1633, he decides to get a bunch of temples raised, including 66 under construction
[Amit Varma]: temples in Banaras.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, later in the story, when Dara Shikoh is, you know, involving himself
[Amit Varma]: with Indic philosophy, calling all these scholars to the court, it is Shah Jahan who is, as
[Amit Varma]: you point out, giving them generous gifts and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, all these figures are so deeply complex and Shah Jahan himself is so complex.
[Amit Varma]: This is a dude who, you know, did away with his whole damn family.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you see this side of him as well.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, you almost feel sorry for him because he's sort of imprisoned by Aurangzeb.
[Amit Varma]: And one story that you pointed out is that, you know, after Dara Shikoh is killed, his
[Amit Varma]: head is sent to Aurangzeb and there is, you know, so and this is another thing, there
[Amit Varma]: are so many versions of that story.
[Amit Varma]: One version of the head story is that Dara Shikoh is beheaded and the head is brought
[Amit Varma]: to Aurangzeb and he says, I don't want to look at it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other version is that he stabs her three times, you know, and sends it to his
[Amit Varma]: dad.
[Amit Varma]: So when you're reading all this delightfully juicy stuff, you know, and you have no way
[Amit Varma]: of knowing which one is true, right?
[Amit Varma]: So how do you navigate that?
[Guest]: So with the head story, some of it, you can see if it falls into recognizable motifs and
[Guest]: tropes that are used elsewhere.
[Guest]: So you know, it's one of the head stories we told by the Italian adventurer Manucci.
[Guest]: You see that what he's doing here is really making Dara Shikoh into a Christ-like figure.
[Guest]: So whether or not the story is true, the way in which Manucci is recounting it serves a
[Guest]: certain narrative end and definitely elicits horror and sympathy.
[Guest]: And these are for things that the European travelers to India wanted to elicit in their
[Guest]: readers.
[Guest]: They spun all kinds of stories and we can't dismiss them completely, but their accounts
[Guest]: are colored by the fact that they were transforming their adventures in India into entertainment
[Guest]: for the consumption of the European reading public.
[Guest]: So they were fitting them into morals that were also familiar to their readers in the
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And after we are done with that, we'll come back from Shah Jahan and zoom into his two
[Amit Varma]: errant children.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Here to tell you about a new weekly podcast that Vivek and I have launched called Econ
[Unknown]: Central.
[Unknown]: In Econ Central, we will help you make sense of the economic news of the last week.
[Unknown]: And we'll also try to explain complex subjects in a simple language.
[Amit Varma]: We will also take events outside the world of economics, like from politics, sports,
[Amit Varma]: literature, and explain them through the lens of economic thinking.
[Unknown]: Why is the stock market going up when the economy is going down?
[Unknown]: What's the deal with high petrol prices?
[Amit Varma]: Should we boycott Chinese goods?
[Amit Varma]: What does free speech have to do with incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why are the roving bandits of Uttar Pradesh in competition with the biggest protection
[Unknown]: racket out there, the Indian state?
[Unknown]: All this and more in our new weekly podcast, Econ Central.
[Amit Varma]: Econ Central launched a few weeks ago and is free on all podcast apps.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse our archives at econcentral.in.
[Unknown]: Econ Central, you have an incentive to listen.
[Amit Varma]: Don't forget the URL, econcentral.in.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Supriya Gandhi about Dara Shukoh, Shah Jahan, Aurangzeb, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know what I sort of found very interesting about your story also is that how your narratives
[Amit Varma]: by placing us in that contemporary moment makes us for a moment, you know, forget what
[Amit Varma]: happened later.
[Amit Varma]: I actually, you know, at different points, you find yourself rooting for guys you eventually
[Amit Varma]: know got beheaded.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought it a very interesting choice to sort of start with the story of Khurram
[Amit Varma]: there because like you pointed out when Dara Shukoh is born, Dara Shukoh is basically,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the first son of the third son.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he's really, you know, there's nothing much happening there and Aurangzeb is even
[Amit Varma]: further down the feeder chain and nothing is ordained.
[Amit Varma]: And for large periods of time, Khurram is not even his father's choice till eventually
[Amit Varma]: he ascends and he becomes Shah Jahan.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Dara Shukoh is sort of regarded, you know, we have the simplistic view that
[Amit Varma]: okay, he's a person who was into spiritual matters and really got into a sort of Hinduism
[Amit Varma]: and the Indic religions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the sense that I got from reading your book is that this stuff happened in stages.
[Amit Varma]: And what seemed to me to be the case, and you can correct me, but my feeling was through
[Amit Varma]: the book that before his intellectual journey really took off, like the sense that I got
[Amit Varma]: initially, although this changes is that it was more of a spiritual journey than an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: journey.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, the way that he meets Mian Mir, for example, and almost instinctively,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sort of prostrates himself before him and offers himself as a disciple.
[Amit Varma]: And it just seems sort of very impulsive and even irrational, because it's not as if he's
[Amit Varma]: read like five books by this guy, and he, you know, really believes in his worldview
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: It's just that he's following some kind of an instinct to attain some kind of spiritual
[Amit Varma]: growth.
[Amit Varma]: And for much of that early period, like after Mian Mir dies, we see this, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: talk about the visions he's having.
[Amit Varma]: And this seemed like very sort of, I mean, I didn't know what to make of that because
[Amit Varma]: he's having visions where his former teacher comes to him in a dream, there is one vision
[Amit Varma]: where his former teacher sort of unbuttons a shirt and then grabs him and there's this
[Amit Varma]: nipple to nipple contact and it's almost like his heart has, you know, this whole sort of
[Amit Varma]: mystical exchange of the spirit happens, there are other visions where the Prophet Muhammad
[Amit Varma]: comes to him in a vision, you know, and if this sort of stuff was to happen in modern
[Amit Varma]: times, you'd really sort of question whether this person needed help, right?
[Amit Varma]: And but he's a prince and this stuff is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And later, of course, and it seems to me that the whole intellectual exploration where he
[Amit Varma]: writes his book about the lives of the 400 Sufi saints and all that, that comes later.
[Amit Varma]: So is that sort of a misreading on my part, or you know, that the narrative gave me that
[Amit Varma]: impression and what do you make of that early, young questing Dara Shikoh who's doing all
[Amit Varma]: these things like he literally prostrates himself first before Mian Mir and then when
[Amit Varma]: he goes to Kashmir, you know, Mullah Shah, where he's doing things that no prince should
[Amit Varma]: really be doing.
[Amit Varma]: But and at that point, you know, you just wonder that these are just religious godmen
[Amit Varma]: at that moment to him, he doesn't know any of them intimately yet, you can develop respect
[Amit Varma]: later once you get to know them, but he's just falling at their feet and offering himself
[Amit Varma]: as a disciple.
[Guest]: So what did you make of all that?
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, we live in a time where, you know, from a certain rational perspective,
[Guest]: you know, all of this seems kind of strange and weird.
[Guest]: But if you look at even our own times, we find that there is, especially today, the
[Guest]: political, spiritual, intellectual are actually really deeply enmeshed.
[Guest]: And that was the case in Dara Shikoh's time, that it's, you know, hard to separate the
[Guest]: political, for instance, from the spiritual, you know, Tip Akbar, who made these great
[Guest]: public shows of piety, he would walk barefoot to the shrine of Monyuddin Chishti to pray
[Guest]: for a son, you know, he would give thanks, and so on.
[Guest]: So Dara Shikoh's displays of piety, that he was later telegraphing, not because he wasn't
[Guest]: an emperor, he didn't have an Abul Fazl, but you know, through his own writings, you know,
[Guest]: I would say these are not merely kind of the rantings of a naive mystical prince with his
[Guest]: head in the clouds.
[Guest]: He was always making a particular argument.
[Guest]: So for instance, when he talks about his first meeting with, with Mian Mir, and he meets
[Guest]: Mian Mir, his father is actually the one who takes him, so his father, and then later we
[Guest]: learn that even Jahangir had reverence for Mian Mir, so he's an established Sufi figure,
[Guest]: you can see that he has influence, because you know, emperors themselves are going giving
[Guest]: him respect.
[Guest]: So he then shows how he had this amazing experience with him, he gets healed, and he shows Mian
[Guest]: Mir true reverence and piety.
[Guest]: And then he makes these kind of little nasty, sort of passive aggressive digs at his own
[Guest]: father and his grandfather saying, yes, you know, and when they went to visit Mian Mir,
[Guest]: they said they wanted to talk about spiritual matters and even sort of like, you know, confided
[Guest]: that we're so sick of rulership, we just want to be like you and, you know, be a recluse
[Guest]: like you and then Mian Mir sharply rebuked them.
[Guest]: So in this case, Dara Shukoh is showing himself in a good light, he's showing himself as the
[Guest]: true Sufi murid, he's a true kind of follower of the path of Sufism, unlike other emperors.
[Guest]: And then maybe this means that he has a special spiritual quality that other rulers don't
[Guest]: have, that he's destined for something really great.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the reason I found this striking, because I don't mean this as a criticism of
[Amit Varma]: Dara Shukoh to say, Oh, look at that mad guy, he was having visions, I'm sorry, if it came
[Amit Varma]: across that way.
[Amit Varma]: That's not what I meant.
[Amit Varma]: The why I found these incidences fascinating is that I was trying to, during the book,
[Amit Varma]: and there are times where I felt I got glimpses of this, but I was trying to get a sense of
[Amit Varma]: what is his interior life, you know, Dara Shukoh's, what's the stuff that what does
[Amit Varma]: he want, you know, what's the stuff that causes turmoil in him, for example, when he does
[Amit Varma]: all of this, like you pointed out, he's trying to portray a side of himself, is he posturing
[Amit Varma]: for others?
[Amit Varma]: Is he posturing for himself?
[Amit Varma]: Is there sometimes an element of self delusion to that?
[Amit Varma]: And does all of this, even if let's say he begins to act in a particular way, because
[Amit Varma]: he's posturing for others or for himself, does it then shape what he actually becomes?
[Amit Varma]: Because later on, you know, he's written all these phenomenal books of scholarship, there's
[Amit Varma]: no question that his intellectual engagement with, you know, both Sufism and Islam and
[Amit Varma]: later on the Indic religions at a much later stage was very deep and genuine.
[Amit Varma]: But in this early stage, what I sometimes get a sense of this young person who is floundering
[Amit Varma]: around for an identity and to define his place in the in the bigger scheme, is that a sense
[Amit Varma]: you got?
[Amit Varma]: And you've obviously read all his original stuff in the original Persian, right?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, do you get a sense of who is this person?
[Amit Varma]: What does he want?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, strip away all the history and he's an emperor and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, that that raises a lot of interesting questions about how one reads these texts,
[Guest]: how one looks at narratives of the self, this is, you know, we have, we have a very modern
[Guest]: post enlightenment view of the self.
[Guest]: The self is this autonomous being.
[Guest]: We have, you know, our own narratives of inner transformations, conversions, understandings
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: We have now that we use the terms of modern psychotherapy, psychoanalysis to, you know,
[Guest]: to talk about the self.
[Guest]: And there were other ideas that and other concepts that people used to understand the
[Guest]: self in Dara Shukla's time.
[Guest]: So it's hard to make a distinction between public performance and the inner journey of
[Guest]: the self.
[Guest]: It's very hard to make that distinction because it's not one that Dara Shukla makes, you know,
[Guest]: it's not as though we have a private diary where he's giving us his private outpourings
[Guest]: and then he has another, you know, some other documents that talk about his, his public
[Guest]: persona.
[Guest]: But I think we can definitely see a journey and a trajectory when Dara Shukla plunges
[Guest]: into spiritual affairs, again, it's, it's not merely kind of cold and instrumental that
[Guest]: he's like just going and paying respects to some, you know, Sufi because he has to, because
[Guest]: it's part of his duty.
[Guest]: He is actually working on cultivating and transforming the self.
[Guest]: And this has been a preoccupation in India in many, many contexts, whether one sees this
[Guest]: in the concept of the Rajarshi, you know, the kind of, again, the ruler who is also
[Guest]: an ascetic.
[Guest]: So we have lots of other, lots of examples, we have lots of examples of, you know, sages,
[Guest]: ascetics, renunciants from different religious traditions who, who would work on this.
[Guest]: And we have a whole tradition of rulers who either renounced the throne or stayed on the
[Guest]: throne and engaged in asceticism.
[Guest]: So it's, it's not surprising that later on, one of the models for Dara Shukla is Ram,
[Guest]: not the Ram necessarily of the Ramayan, you know, who is in exile and then becomes a ruler
[Guest]: of Ayodhya.
[Guest]: But this is the Ram of the Yoga Vasishta, where Ram is a young prince and his guru Vasishta
[Guest]: takes him on the spiritual journey by telling him a whole range of interlocking stories.
[Guest]: One story leads to the other story, and Ram is reaching different levels of spiritual
[Guest]: perfection, finally, until he reaches Jivanmukti.
[Guest]: And it's this idea of Jivanmukti was one that was very attractive to Mughal emperors, you
[Guest]: know, Jahangir had beautifully lavishly illustrated manuscripts of the Yoga Vasishta, there was
[Guest]: one that was translated for Akbar, you know, Jahangir had a special one translated.
[Guest]: Dara Shukla was also very interested in this text, and even though all the others had their
[Guest]: own versions, he also got his own version of it.
[Guest]: And it was a text that, in different abridgments, circulated all around South Asia.
[Guest]: And even today, you know, whether it's the Yoga Vasishta, or whether it's a similar Vedic
[Guest]: text on liberation, you find them everywhere, they're very popular, circulated by Gita Press,
[Guest]: they're found in railway stations, and so on.
[Guest]: So it's an idea of enduring satisfaction, because at this point, this was a way in which
[Guest]: a king or a ruler could be liberated, and then he could still carry out his royal tasks.
[Guest]: So, you know, what could be better than that?
[Guest]: And then later on, these ideas became very important for merchants, especially for those
[Guest]: of the middle castes, you know, so they weren't necessarily going and kind of being ascetics,
[Guest]: they were engaged in earning money, they were engaged in the material world.
[Guest]: And at the same time, they cultivated a great sense of asceticism, you know, we see that
[Guest]: with certain version of business families, you know, there's a great emphasis on personal
[Guest]: asceticism, as well as amassing a lot of material wealth in the world.
[Guest]: And so how do you balance that, you know, the Yoga Vasishta is a good guide for that,
[Amit Varma]: which Ganesh also found quite useful.
[Amit Varma]: So would it be fair to say, and I'm just thinking aloud that then there are two sort of dual
[Amit Varma]: imperatives that seem to come into play.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that you are an emperor, and you have conquered all the lands you can conquer,
[Amit Varma]: but you cannot conquer death.
[Amit Varma]: So what do we do?
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of leads to this quest.
[Amit Varma]: But the other side of that is that, actually, you've conquered nothing, because you've got
[Amit Varma]: relatives plotting against you, and every moment is stressful in some way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And you got to watch your back.
[Amit Varma]: And this stuff gives you some release.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, would both of these be factors, you think?
[Guest]: Yes, you know, I definitely agree.
[Guest]: I mean, Dara Shukoh, he certainly was going far deeper down this route than a lot of other
[Guest]: Mughals.
[Guest]: Again, you know, but he wasn't unique, you know, his brother Murad had a Sufi peer, and
[Guest]: he was always in contact with him, and the peer was always giving him guidance.
[Guest]: Aurangzeb met a whole range of peers, Aurangzeb was more savvy in that way, you know, he didn't
[Guest]: put all his eggs in one basket.
[Guest]: But Shuja also paid reverence to Mullah Shah, the Sufi peer of Shah Jahan's household, and
[Guest]: especially Dara Shukoh.
[Guest]: So there were ways in which all the others were doing this, but Dara more than the others
[Guest]: was really cultivating himself as the quintessential philosopher, you know.
[Amit Varma]: It's also interesting how in the book, you talk about the influence on the Mughal kings
[Amit Varma]: of the example of Alexander, like you point out how Jahangir in one of his books quotes
[Amit Varma]: this following line, quote, sovereignty brooks no bonds between fathers and sons and emperor
[Amit Varma]: has no relatives, stock quote, which you point out is from the Iskandar Nama by Nizami Ganjavi,
[Amit Varma]: which is, again, about Alexander.
[Amit Varma]: And there are these two sides to Alexander, both of which seem very relevant to Dara Shukoh.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, that you have no friends, and you got to watch out for your brothers.
[Amit Varma]: And as we've seen in Shah Jahan and Jahangir and earlier that, and in, of course, poor
[Amit Varma]: Dara Shukoh's own generation that you basically have to get rid of all your brothers and nephews
[Amit Varma]: or at the very least blind them.
[Amit Varma]: So that's one angle where he's growing up, he is the chosen one of the emperor.
[Amit Varma]: But he's got an eye, he's the eldest son, but there's no primogenitor.
[Amit Varma]: So it isn't that, you know, the eldest son automatically becomes king.
[Amit Varma]: So he's got an eye on the prize.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've pointed out how in the book, he'll try to influence things his father
[Amit Varma]: does about, you know, sending Aurangzeb somewhere or, you know, making sure that two of the
[Amit Varma]: other brothers don't meet so they can't plot with each other and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, there is that very realpolitik kind of, you know, eye on the throne, watch
[Amit Varma]: out for everyone and beware of your brothers.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side, there is that intellectual and spiritual quest.
[Amit Varma]: And Alexander, of course, also famously was on his own kind of intellectual quest.
[Amit Varma]: And you also see that mirroring itself out, you know, very often on a tangent, it's very
[Amit Varma]: hard for me to imagine those times, because how do people gain the knowledge of the world?
[Amit Varma]: There are no books, there's no television, there's no internet, there's nothing.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you have these heroes like Alexander and Timur and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one wonders what is the popular culture of the time and where do you learn
[Amit Varma]: your history from?
[Amit Varma]: And yet, you know, people like Alexander and Timur are clearly examples.
[Amit Varma]: How much of this would have sort of played a part in Dara's becoming who he was like
[Amit Varma]: one is he's wrestling with these dual imperatives of very early real world imperative or watch
[Amit Varma]: out for your brothers and do what you gotta do to, you know, be the next big boy.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one is that whole intellectual and spiritual quest he's on.
[Amit Varma]: And some of it comes from phobias like Alexander, like maybe Timur in terms of the sort of empirary
[Amit Varma]: wars or even Akbar, though, as you say, he doesn't acknowledge Akbar much, but even Akbar
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the syncretism and the way he sort of is open to other cultures.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a sense that these made a difference to Dara Shikoh in shaping him, the person
[Amit Varma]: he was and what he went on to become?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: So all of these were models for Timurid kings.
[Guest]: And you know, you're right in that they weren't printed books, the way we have printed today.
[Guest]: So books didn't, they were expensive, they didn't circulate in the same way.
[Guest]: But books are very important.
[Guest]: You know, the invention of writing and of the written codex, you know, meant that you
[Guest]: could you could really have the whole world between two covers, you know, in a sort of
[Guest]: bundle of papers.
[Guest]: And more libraries, of course, also famous, Dara Shikoh had the advantage of several generations
[Guest]: of collection.
[Guest]: He also, you know, got his own, acquired his own manuscripts and sponsored the copying
[Guest]: of others.
[Guest]: So books did circulate, you know, they just not to the extent that they do, but they did
[Guest]: circulate.
[Guest]: And we can see that ideas circulated and ideas spilled out of books and circulated and permeated
[Guest]: the popular imagination.
[Guest]: So the idea of Alexander as a powerful conqueror, and as a powerful conqueror, he also was successful
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: He overpowered Indians.
[Guest]: So there's that.
[Guest]: And he also was a philosophical ruler, he would have dialogues, a kind of Darbar sort
[Guest]: of similar to the dialogues that Akbar had with philosophers in his Abadadkhana.
[Guest]: So these dual roles of Alexander came to be very important.
[Guest]: And I think Alexander is one of the overlooked models for the Mughal, the Indian Timurid
[Guest]: kings.
[Guest]: So these past figures were very, very important for Mughal rulers, and they were constantly
[Guest]: invoked.
[Guest]: Definitely Temur, you know, Temur is one of them, you know, somebody who Shah Jahan very
[Guest]: consciously modelled himself on, and, you know, helped circulate his spurious memoirs
[Guest]: that gained a lot of popularity, but honestly, he never vanishes.
[Guest]: It becomes very common for people to talk about the second Sikandar, you know, you might
[Guest]: even have heard that, you know, so one of the bitter ironies of the story, and one reason
[Guest]: why I bring up Alexander at the beginning, in the context of Jahangir and the dialogues
[Guest]: that are taking place at Jahangir's court, is because, yes, of course, this both sides
[Guest]: of Alexander to different degrees become important for Shah Jahan's sons, and for Dara Shukoh,
[Guest]: and then you know that, you know, that of course, so Alexander defeats Darius, you know,
[Guest]: the emperor whom Dara is also named for.
[Guest]: And then finally, after the Battle of Samogar, you know, there's a poet who says, now in
[Guest]: this case, you have the second, the Sikandar, who is defeating Dara.
[Guest]: So that becomes, so there is this bitter irony that, you know, we have Dara Shukoh, who is
[Guest]: modeling himself on Alexander, you know, on Alexander as a portrait in Persian poetry.
[Guest]: And then, then we actually have Aurangzeb, who truly becomes the second Sikandar and
[Guest]: defeats his brother Dara.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk a bit about the religious landscape of the time, like another sort of false binary
[Amit Varma]: that seems to have come down is that, you know, is of orthodox Islam, the Sunnis on
[Amit Varma]: the one side, and then you have the Sufis on the other side, who don't really, you know,
[Amit Varma]: believe in all of those conventions and are much more free flowing, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: As you point out, this isn't quite true, like you refer to how Dara Shukoh in his first
[Amit Varma]: book Safina Tulaliya assigned himself as Muhammad Dara Shukoh, Hanafi Qadiri.
[Amit Varma]: And Hanafi, of course, as a nod to the orthodox elements in Qadiri is, you know, one of the
[Amit Varma]: Sufi strands.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, sort of point Qadiri, and therefore sort of pointing out that there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: incongruous about those going together.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak of sort of the interplay between that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that landscape and how the sort of explorations that Dara
[Amit Varma]: Shukoh was making, were they as unusual as they are made out to be today?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it all par for the course in those times?
[Guest]: So I would say both things are true in that, yes, there were sections at the court who
[Guest]: might have been disapproving of what Dara Shukoh engaged in.
[Guest]: It was also hard to say, you know, who an alim was, who is a member of the ulema.
[Guest]: You know, if you look at any kind of modern Bollywood movie on the mobiles, then you might
[Guest]: see these kind of black robed people who are always like plucking and tuck-tutting about
[Guest]: things that are going on, you know, say Emperor Akbar has a wife and she's doing puja, you
[Guest]: know, and then like, they get really upset about that.
[Guest]: So you know, a very easily visible group who don't stand for pluralism, you know, who are
[Guest]: very close minded.
[Guest]: And this stems from modern developments.
[Guest]: So the idea of the ulema as a very closed social group who are separate from Sufis is
[Guest]: something that happens at a later stage in South Asia.
[Guest]: Now at this stage in the 17th century, a lot of, you know, who, you know, an alim, a member
[Guest]: of the ulema, is really, is a learned person.
[Guest]: And a lot of these people had roles at the court.
[Guest]: So they juggled multiple tasks and responsibilities.
[Guest]: And many of them had initiation in different Sufi orders.
[Guest]: So the idea of a Sufism that, again, is more tolerant, heterodox, and it's totally separate
[Guest]: from the more judicial world, legalistic world of the ulema, is not something that we see
[Guest]: when we look at the court chronicles and when we look at lists of who an alim is, for instance.
[Guest]: So they might have a list of the ulema and the hukama and the fuzala, you know, so the
[Guest]: people who are considered to be learned.
[Guest]: And you know, these could be physicians.
[Guest]: These could be people who are well versed in Islamic law, but they also have initiation
[Guest]: in a Sufi order.
[Guest]: One such person could have, his main job could be managing the emperor's household, you know,
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: So it's not as though there, you know, there was like the separate like room or council
[Guest]: of ulema who didn't have other worldly responsibilities.
[Guest]: And you know, their sole job was to release what was acceptable and respectable and what
[Guest]: wasn't.
[Guest]: At the same time, there were different strands of thought, you know, amongst Sufis also.
[Guest]: There were Sufis who leaned towards the more ecstatic sides of the side of things.
[Guest]: For instance, those who enjoyed or propagated listening to music, musical audition.
[Guest]: And then there were Sufis who espoused a more sober form of religiosity.
[Guest]: So there were definitely divisions, but the divisions did not fall along the lines of
[Amit Varma]: Sufis versus ulema.
[Amit Varma]: You know, having looked at Dara Shikoh, let's also talk about Aurangzeb, because one of
[Amit Varma]: the things you sort of demonstrate in your book as well is that the traditional view
[Amit Varma]: of him as this austere religious bigot who did not, you know, who was extremely orthodox,
[Amit Varma]: did not have any regard for the arts and all of that is not quite true either.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about the young Aurangzeb, especially again, I was sort of struck trying
[Amit Varma]: to, by the glimpses one got of the human aspects of him, for example, just as, you know, Dara
[Amit Varma]: is close to his elder sister Jahanara and they share so many of the same interests in
[Amit Varma]: terms of religion and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: We find that Aurangzeb is also close to Jahanara and he's always, you know, going and meeting
[Amit Varma]: her and obviously regards her very much.
[Amit Varma]: And there's also a sense where you speak about how, you know, Dara's sort of in court in
[Amit Varma]: Lahore and Aurangzeb has, you know, is visiting from somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: And he's very upset because Dara is not giving him the importance he feels he deserves.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost as if he wants his elder brother to sort of, you know, to love him almost,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: What's the sense that you got of Aurangzeb as an individual during these young years
[Amit Varma]: who's also growing up and trying to find his identity?
[Amit Varma]: What's his journey like?
[Guest]: So the thing with Aurangzeb is because he becomes emperor later on.
[Guest]: So anything that he wrote is of high value and is preserved and circulated.
[Guest]: So we have a whole range of letters that Aurangzeb has written and these letters get collected
[Guest]: and they circulate later on.
[Guest]: So, you know, so we don't have them necessarily all of them like directly from Aurangzeb,
[Guest]: you know, with the seal.
[Guest]: We don't have those original documents, but you have the letters as they are preserved
[Guest]: in later collections, collections that were made during his lifetime.
[Guest]: So we do, we have that advantage in that we can see his own personal, we can hear his
[Guest]: own personal voice more clearly than we can a lot of the other mughals.
[Guest]: And through these letters, we see that there are a number of letters he writes to his elder
[Guest]: sister Jahanara.
[Guest]: The popular perception is that he was close to Roshanara, Dara Shukoh was close to Jahanara
[Guest]: and Murad was close to Goharara and, you know, so there were these different factions that
[Guest]: were formed.
[Guest]: And we really see Jahanara's role as family peacemaker.
[Guest]: She maintains a good relationship with all her brothers.
[Guest]: She really goes out of her way to do that.
[Guest]: She goes out of her way to try to smooth over any difficulties that they might have, tries
[Guest]: to entertain meetings between them, for instance, and, you know, perhaps she engineers reconciliation
[Guest]: or tries to between Dara and Aurangzeb when Dara is serving as governor of Lahore.
[Guest]: And we get glimpses of like the sisterly relationship that she has with Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: She's always writing to him more than he writes to her.
[Guest]: She's sending him various gifts, you know, murabbas and, you know, like various like
[Guest]: treats and delicacies, you know, so we get a sense of the human side of Aurangzeb through
[Guest]: these affectionate letters that he writes to his sister.
[Guest]: And we also get a sense of his grievances.
[Guest]: That also has to do with the nature of the sources because a lot of the argument that
[Guest]: is made later on to justify Dara Shukoh's murder and Aurangzeb's accession to the throne
[Guest]: is that Dara Shukoh was really, apart from the fact that, you know, he was supposed to
[Guest]: be an infidel and so on, that Dara Shukoh was not really a good son and a good brother.
[Guest]: He was, he took over at the helm of affairs from his father, he was not fair to his brothers.
[Guest]: So that could also color the kinds of sources that are later preserved and circulated that
[Guest]: show Aurangzeb to be a sensitive sibling.
[Guest]: At the same time, you know, we do get a sense, you know, that he enjoyed listening to music
[Guest]: when he was a prince, he might have, you know, there is this album that's associated with
[Guest]: him, like supposed to be a stunning album of art, if indeed it is found and found to
[Guest]: be authentic, that would give us an amazing picture of his own artistic sponsorship and
[Guest]: interest when he was a prince.
[Guest]: So in these regards, he was not so different from other Mughal princes who were patrons
[Guest]: of the arts and so on, you know, they cultivated their own aesthetic side as just part of being
[Guest]: elite Mughals.
[Guest]: He did temper that later on, you know, partly to show himself in contrast to his brother,
[Guest]: you know, so he, there was a change, there's definitely, you know, like far less sponsorship
[Guest]: of cultural activities when he was emperor.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the thoughts that kind of struck me while reading the book was that in one
[Amit Varma]: curious aspect, Aurangzeb reminded me of Indira Gandhi, in the sense that when Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: needed to rebrand herself and distinguish herself from the syndicate in the late 1960s,
[Amit Varma]: she took this massive leftward turn to set herself apart, because that was the only way
[Amit Varma]: to sort of distinguish herself as a brand.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that in some ways, would it be fair to say that, you know, those could
[Amit Varma]: be the imperatives behind Aurangzeb also moving in that more doctrinaire, sort of rigid direction
[Amit Varma]: to distinguish himself from his main rival for the throne, which was Dara Shago and even
[Amit Varma]: perhaps to some extent from his father.
[Amit Varma]: So would you say that those incentives also kind of came into play?
[Guest]: Most definitely, you know, I think, I think it took Aurangzeb a little while to fully
[Guest]: define himself by abandoning the traditions of his forebears, you know, whether it's the
[Guest]: Jharkha Darshan, you know, where the emperor kind of sits and has, you know, everyone view
[Guest]: him at this Jharkha, which is an institution that Akbar really established and popularized.
[Guest]: So it took him a while, you know, it didn't all happen overnight.
[Guest]: But there was this process by which, you know, even during the struggle for succession, you
[Guest]: can see that there are some insinuations about heresy on the part of Dara Shago.
[Guest]: And these insinuations get solidified once he becomes emperor so that he does have a
[Guest]: solid case that's built up.
[Guest]: And he then has his own very austere model of kingship that again is a departure from
[Amit Varma]: his ancestors.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud, would it be then fair to say that wherever you have this sort
[Amit Varma]: of a conflict, it's bound to be a polarizing one and it's bound to drive people towards
[Amit Varma]: the extremes?
[Amit Varma]: Like you could argue that, you know, Aurangzeb might have been not as extreme as he was,
[Amit Varma]: but he felt the need to define himself.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in modern times, if you look at Pakistan, would it be fair to say that to
[Amit Varma]: some extent, they are shaped by their need to define themselves in opposition to what
[Amit Varma]: India is, for example?
[Guest]: Yes, you know, I think that's, that's really happening on both sides, you know, just take
[Guest]: language, for instance, the way in which the Urdu language has developed in Pakistan, official
[Guest]: Urdu, is highly Persianized, there are a lot of Persian and Arabic neologisms, there are
[Guest]: many ways in which there's an attempt to look westwards, to look at West Asia, you know,
[Guest]: for cultural models, as opposed to India, of course, one can't totally sort of build
[Guest]: a wall.
[Guest]: There are still lots of commonalities and lots of cultural interactions, you know, similarly
[Guest]: with the official Hindi that is used in television and in officialdom in India today, that these
[Guest]: Hindi and Urdu have become two languages that are not so easily mutually intelligible, for
[Guest]: the language that people speak often, you know, falls in the middle of the spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I traveled through Pakistan while covering a cricket tour in 2006, and I spent a month
[Amit Varma]: and a half there.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from the Urdu signs, it didn't feel like I was in a foreign country and the language
[Amit Varma]: is exactly the same and I was sort of aware of, you know, the Hindi nationalism, so to
[Amit Varma]: say, and how Shuddh Hindi is such an artificial construct and has been modeled out of that
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't aware that there's a similar process happening with Urdu in Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just thinking aloud, you know, when I watch Prime Minister Modi's 8pm speeches
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and it strikes me that the kind of Hindi that he uses very deliberately,
[Amit Varma]: is that kind of Shuddh Hindi which people don't speak and therefore I'm sort of kind
[Amit Varma]: of baffled by the immense popularity because he's not actually speaking even the language
[Amit Varma]: of the Hindi heartland.
[Amit Varma]: He's speaking this very Shuddh Hindi, which people don't speak in their everyday lives
[Amit Varma]: from my experience, so I was but that's, that's an aside.
[Amit Varma]: Kind of moving on, you know, and again, earlier, I spoke about how it seemed to me through
[Amit Varma]: the book that you have sort of Tara evolving in stages where, you know, initially, it felt
[Amit Varma]: like a spiritual journey, and then there's an intellectual ballast to it.
[Amit Varma]: And he writes these different books.
[Amit Varma]: And then after he's comes back from his failed conquest of Kandahar, there is this deeper
[Amit Varma]: turn and this engagement with the Indic philosophies, which wasn't there earlier.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, more specifically, the project of translating the Upanishads into Persian.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he even had a theory that the Upanishads were the lost book mentioned in the Quran,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that phase.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you think drove that phase because it doesn't seem to be, you know, like it's
[Amit Varma]: been speculated that part of it was because he was trying to get alliances among the Rajputs
[Amit Varma]: and he wanted to portray that image.
[Amit Varma]: But this seems a bit too far to go for the sake of posturing.
[Amit Varma]: And also the fact of the matter, as you've pointed out, is that, you know, the Rajputs
[Amit Varma]: were equally divided in Aurangzeb's camp as in Dara Shikoh's camp.
[Amit Varma]: This is simply a post facto binary we have kind of invented.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about his new deepening interest into sort of the Indic philosophies.
[Guest]: So I think there are a couple of things going on here.
[Guest]: One is the deepening and widening of Dara Shikoh's own spiritual intellectual interests,
[Guest]: which come from a genuine curiosity and also a kind of restlessness.
[Guest]: So Dara Shikoh is, he feels that he has perhaps had his fill of Sufism, not, you know, not
[Guest]: in the sense that he's kind of completed, but he's already ascended these amazing spiritual
[Guest]: heights.
[Guest]: He's done what he can.
[Guest]: He's now speaking not as a disciple, but he's really speaking as a master who is giving
[Guest]: instruction on the Sufi path.
[Guest]: And you can see seeds of his interest in Indic thought.
[Guest]: And there's already a basis for this, because in Sufi writings and poetry, there is the
[Guest]: celebration of what is not Islam.
[Guest]: There's the celebration of what is called kufr, you know, or infidelity.
[Guest]: And the celebration is something that's, it's really complicated, you know, it doesn't mean
[Guest]: that everyone has to go out and just do things that are completely against religion.
[Guest]: But the poetry, certain Sufi writings, give a space for this in order to really ascend
[Guest]: higher spiritual levels and metaphorically see the countenance of the beloved, you know,
[Guest]: which is the divine.
[Guest]: So Dara Shukh was already, you know, even before this, he's reaching out to other Sufi
[Guest]: masters.
[Guest]: You know, he's achieved what he's wanted to with the Qadavis and his sister and his father
[Guest]: continue their relationship with them and so does Dara, but you know, Dara doesn't stay
[Guest]: with that.
[Guest]: You know, he writes to other people and what he doesn't want to do is to go into the real
[Guest]: nitty gritties of philosophical Sufism, which he can if he wants to, you know, this famous
[Guest]: Andalusian mystic, Ibn Arabi, whose very, very complex and abstruse Arabic writings
[Guest]: have been translated and commented upon in India, in the Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: One of the most famous interpreters of Ibn Arabi is Sheikh Muhibbullah Elahabadi, with
[Guest]: whom Dara has a correspondence.
[Guest]: And Dara Shukh wants something that's a little more transgressive and perhaps a little less
[Guest]: arduous than kind of sitting and, you know, like understanding these really difficult
[Guest]: texts.
[Guest]: So he starts getting interested in Indic thought, and there's already a tradition of that.
[Guest]: And there are already several yogic ideas that have been incorporated into Chishti mysticism.
[Guest]: And you know, it could be that the Qadavis also have some association with that.
[Guest]: And then he goes even deeper.
[Guest]: So when he's coming back from Kandahar, he makes sure to stop and have dialogues with
[Guest]: a Vaishnava ascetic called Baba Lal.
[Guest]: And he has all these dialogues.
[Guest]: So we have the results of those sessions written down, except that it doesn't seem that these
[Guest]: are really the literal transcripts, there are many different versions of this.
[Guest]: But we can see that Dara Shukh has acquainted himself with at least the Persian translations
[Guest]: of the Ramayana and so on, and he has questions.
[Guest]: And I think he finds his dialogues with Baba Lal inspiring enough that he continues and
[Guest]: he goes further.
[Guest]: And he's already compiled a collection of rather shocking, sort of transgressive, ecstatic
[Guest]: sayings of Sufis, and he's included some non-Muslims in them, including Baba Lal.
[Guest]: So once he's in Delhi, he starts branching out, and he already has access to a lot of
[Guest]: works in the Mughal library, but he wants to patronize and sponsor more.
[Guest]: And the other thing that's going on is that this is a time when both he and Aurangzeb
[Guest]: are competing to really jockey for alliances and influence amongst Rajput rulers.
[Guest]: So say there's some trouble brewing in Mewar, both of them want to try, they want to be
[Guest]: the first ones to go there and to try to solve it, and they compete by sending their envoys,
[Guest]: Brahmin envoys, like a sensitive choice, and messengers.
[Guest]: And later on in the eve of the Battle of Succession, Aurangzeb is also telling Rana Raj, saying,
[Guest]: I'm going to be like my illustrious forebears, I'm going to allow everyone to flourish in
[Guest]: peace with their own religions, and so on.
[Guest]: So Aurangzeb is making this very, very explicit gesture towards fostering an environment of
[Guest]: religious pluralism.
[Guest]: And Dayaan Shukla is doing it in a less direct way, not that he's not interested, he is,
[Guest]: but one can't wish away this backdrop where they each try to gain influence amongst the
[Amit Varma]: Rajputs.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all the historians that I've had on my show don't like counterfactuals so much.
[Amit Varma]: It's only non historians who love to speculate about, you know, what would have happened
[Amit Varma]: if this person did this and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, given that there is such a dominant narrative around this particular
[Amit Varma]: counterfactual given that, you know, Ashok referred to Dara Shukla's death as the partition
[Amit Varma]: before partition, what is your sense of what kind of an emperor he would have been if he
[Amit Varma]: had somehow managed to win?
[Amit Varma]: Because really, his managing to win is a few lucky events here and there, like you point
[Amit Varma]: out how when Aurangzeb when getting rid of one of the other brothers pretended he had
[Amit Varma]: dysentery and called him to his tent and plied him with drink.
[Amit Varma]: Now Aurangzeb could actually have gotten dysentery and died right in those times.
[Amit Varma]: So if Dara Shukla ends up as emperor, what's your brief sense?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you've already pointed out that he was like a sort of a co-ruler for a long time
[Amit Varma]: by Shah Jahan's side, and wouldn't have been very different from Aurangzeb because he would
[Amit Varma]: have followed the imperatives of politics and he would have had to kill all his brothers.
[Amit Varma]: Probably I think in the book, you mentioned that when his son, Suleiman is chasing his
[Amit Varma]: brother Shuja across the border, he tells him bring me back his head, something to that
[Amit Varma]: effect.
[Amit Varma]: So all of that would have happened.
[Amit Varma]: But in terms of the Indian subcontinent, would it have made a difference or would the larger
[Amit Varma]: currents of history have continued going more or less the way they did?
[Guest]: So it's a difficult question.
[Guest]: Of course, one thing to keep in mind is that when the war of succession broke out, Shah
[Guest]: Jahan was ill, he was possibly severely ill.
[Guest]: I actually had a well-known medical specialist from Yale kind of give me his take on what
[Guest]: Shah Jahan's illness might have been, but he survives.
[Guest]: He survives for many years after that.
[Guest]: So Dara would not have been official ruler right away, though he would have been a kind
[Guest]: of co-ruler or proxy ruler along with his father.
[Guest]: So I think perhaps that period of time would have also helped him learn the ropes better
[Guest]: of rule.
[Guest]: He would have tried to be a sacred ruler in the model, again, of his forebears, in the
[Guest]: model of Akbar.
[Guest]: In terms of the broader structural problems of the Mughal Empire, whether what Irfan Habib
[Guest]: has termed the agrarian crisis, the very costly Deccan expansions, for instance, the other
[Guest]: foreign adventures that Shah Jahan liked to fund.
[Guest]: So these were all serious issues, and it's hard to see how Dara Shukoh might have prevented
[Guest]: that, if at all.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I think we've spoken a lot about your book, and I'll leave it to readers to read it for
[Amit Varma]: themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I highly recommend it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to what you're working on now.
[Amit Varma]: The book was finished a while back, and of course, there is that whole release cycle
[Amit Varma]: and you have to go around promoting it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But what are you working on now?
[Amit Varma]: What preoccupies you?
[Guest]: I'm working on a book that, in some indirect ways, is a sequel to this, except that it's
[Guest]: not about Aurangzeb, and it's more a history of ideas than a biography of one particular
[Guest]: person.
[Guest]: But the reason why it's connected to this book is because part of the idea starts by
[Guest]: seeing what happens to Dara Shukoh's writings, and that's something that I hint in the epilogue.
[Guest]: So Aurangzeb did do his best to efface traces of Dara Shukoh.
[Guest]: He didn't succeed completely, and later rulers and writers did try to complete the work.
[Guest]: But what we see, if we look at the manuscripts and circulation of Persian manuscripts, is
[Guest]: that there were lots and lots of people making out copies of Dara Shukoh's writings, circulating
[Guest]: and reading them, and a lot of these happened to be Hindus.
[Guest]: And in Aurangzeb, and even during Aurangzeb, you just see growing numbers of Hindus who
[Guest]: were literate in Persian.
[Guest]: So these came to form part of a socially privileged elite administrative class.
[Guest]: There were often certain castes that we see that predominated, Kayas, Khatris, certain
[Guest]: Brahmins.
[Guest]: They were using Persian just like elite Indians use English today.
[Guest]: English is seen as the passport to success, to a shot at a good upper-middle class life,
[Guest]: social mobility.
[Guest]: And at the same time, there are certain groups who are learning English.
[Guest]: I mean, there's not all that much mobility, so the elites are reproducing themselves.
[Guest]: And that's sort of what we see in the 17th and 18th centuries, but we see these growing
[Guest]: numbers of Hindus who come to be part of the vast local bureaucracy, again, Aurangzeb expanded
[Guest]: the bureaucracy, and these Hindus are looking for ways in which to access their sacred texts.
[Guest]: And not all of them are Brahmins, and many of them don't know any Sanskrit.
[Guest]: They might be, of course, conversant in Hindavi and various early forms of Hindi and so on.
[Guest]: And they read in Persian, and they write in Persian, and many of them are reading and
[Guest]: writing Dara Shukla's works, and they're also writing, producing their own works.
[Guest]: They're producing their own religious texts in Persian.
[Guest]: And these people come to be the intermediaries at the time of British colonialism.
[Guest]: So we have the British winning the Battle of Plassey, trying to expand their hold over
[Guest]: the subcontinent.
[Guest]: And they also, they want to learn about the peoples over which they rule.
[Guest]: They want to devise laws and so on to apply and use in their courts.
[Guest]: And they, initially, Brahmins are reluctant to teach them Sanskrit, and they find people
[Guest]: to teach them Persian.
[Guest]: And Persian is the first language that they use for governing.
[Guest]: So there is this whole class of munchies and translators, literatures, who are either tutors
[Guest]: to colonial officials or informants to them, who are telling them about Indian customs
[Guest]: and Indian religions, and this is what Hinduism is all about.
[Guest]: And part of this is being shaped just by what colonial sponsors and patrons want to learn,
[Guest]: and part of this is being shaped by what these informants are telling them.
[Guest]: So there is this collaborative process that is creating a huge, huge body of work in Persian
[Guest]: that is about religion in India.
[Amit Varma]: And what's the impact of this work?
[Guest]: So the impact of this is, it's shaping colonial policy.
[Guest]: It's also shaping how Hindus, in this case, are presenting themselves and thinking about
[Guest]: themselves.
[Guest]: So it's in dialogue with other broader trends that are taking place, that would have taken
[Guest]: place in the 18th century, regardless of colonialism.
[Guest]: And it's also influenced by the kinds of things that colonial officials wanted to learn, and
[Guest]: it's creating new centers of patronage, competing centers.
[Guest]: So for instance, in the 18th century, we have Delhi being sacked, there are numerous attacks,
[Guest]: of course, there are various Afghan attacks on Delhi, there are the Marathas, and then
[Guest]: we have centers that are further east that are really gaining in prominence and in cultural
[Guest]: vibrancy.
[Guest]: Whether it's Fezabad or Lucknow or Benares, the population of Benares becomes double that
[Guest]: of Delhi.
[Guest]: We have Calcutta and so on.
[Guest]: So we have all these centers that are becoming centers of patronage, and these are becoming
[Guest]: hubs of Persian literature, like Benares, which we associate with Sanskrit and Sanskrit
[Guest]: learning also becomes a hub of Persian, partly because of the East India Company and their
[Guest]: interest in the region.
[Guest]: And we have all these Hindus, this network of Hindus who are traveling, who are producing
[Guest]: knowledge in Persian.
[Guest]: And to me, this is an interesting angle on the prehistory of later developments.
[Guest]: So it's often been neglected because it's the historians of the Mughal period of what's
[Guest]: called medieval Indian history, but what we also call the early modern period, who tend
[Guest]: to use Persian.
[Guest]: And often historians of the modern period tend to look at sources in other languages.
[Guest]: You know, again, not hard and fast rules, but these are the trends.
[Guest]: So I wanted to see what certain elite Hindus were reading and writing, because I wanted
[Guest]: to look at the history and trajectory of certain ideas.
[Guest]: The idea of universalism, for instance, or the idea that there is a kind of core monotheistic
[Guest]: essence to religion, no matter what you call it.
[Guest]: Some people called it Sanatan Dharm, some people kind of just called it religion or
[Guest]: the essence of Hinduism.
[Guest]: So it's the evolution of Hinduism into something that was stripped down, universal, that had
[Guest]: its roots in Mughal Indology, and that also becomes sort of seen as the cultural matrix
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: So I find that Persian and Urdu sources are really an interesting lens through which to
[Amit Varma]: look at that.
[Amit Varma]: Would it then be the case that this sort of stripping down of Hinduism or, you know, getting
[Amit Varma]: to broad core principles and all of that is happening partly because of the language?
[Amit Varma]: Is the language shaping the content?
[Amit Varma]: Is the fact that this is, you know, a bunch of Brahmins who are speaking and writing in
[Amit Varma]: what is essentially till that point a foreign language?
[Amit Varma]: Does it change the nature of the content that is being produced?
[Amit Varma]: Is it more universal and say less insular than the content that might otherwise be produced
[Amit Varma]: at that time in Sanskrit or Hindavi or whatever the local languages are?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: And I find that there are ways in which the language definitely shapes what's being produced.
[Guest]: There are certain texts that are just more receptive to translation, but it doesn't entirely
[Guest]: shape that.
[Guest]: So we do have a lot of Advaitic texts that are being circulated, but this isn't only
[Guest]: happening in Persian.
[Guest]: So what's happening in Persian also mirrors what is happening in Hindavi.
[Guest]: So we have this whole series of Braj Bhasha translations of Advaitic texts that become
[Guest]: really popular.
[Guest]: So we have a kind of vernacularization of Vedanta and Persian is contributing to and
[Guest]: mirroring this trend, but all of this is laying the groundwork for Vedanta being seen as the
[Guest]: kind of essence of Hinduism later on.
[Guest]: So we have the popularization of Vedanta that is taking place and Persian is a major driver
[Guest]: for that.
[Guest]: And I don't know how, to what extent Persian is being seen as a foreign language, you know,
[Guest]: by some perhaps, but by others, you know, they are very, very comfortable with it.
[Guest]: Just like English, for instance.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's what I was going to say.
[Amit Varma]: Much as English is very much an Indian language today, so no one should complain about words
[Amit Varma]: like preporn.
[Amit Varma]: And question I'll ask about this project then, I mean, it sounds incredibly fascinating and
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't aware that Persian was so widely used within the subcontinent by people who
[Amit Varma]: weren't part of the empire per se, but then what's the broad aha moment there?
[Amit Varma]: What drove you to the project and what excited you about it?
[Guest]: Well, one of the things that drove me to this was when you look at figures who seem to be
[Guest]: really key to the evolution of modern Hindu thought, like Radha Ram Mohan Roy, you know,
[Guest]: his initial writings, his initial book, the Tawfat al Mawahidin, is in Persian, you know,
[Guest]: with an Arabic introduction.
[Guest]: It was initially written in Persian, you know, I found that that work is in dialogue with
[Guest]: the writings of various other Hindus and Muslims, you know, people who considered themselves
[Guest]: kind of sort of freethinkers, but who were very also not shaped by the colonial context
[Guest]: who are resident in Banaras and he's supposed to have traveled to Banaras.
[Guest]: So I find that it definitely gives an interesting window onto this.
[Guest]: One of the ways in which I'm personally interested in the study is that among scholars of the
[Guest]: field, there is this perennial debate about Hinduism.
[Guest]: And this is something that, you know, no doubt would seem really shocking to many people
[Guest]: in India, people who might consider themselves Hindus.
[Guest]: And the debate is really about whether Hinduism, of course, the English term Hinduism is something
[Guest]: that's pretty modern, you know, from the 18th century.
[Guest]: Is this something that was really shaped and formed under colonial rule?
[Guest]: Or is this something that existed earlier?
[Guest]: You know, there are some scholars of colonialism who are using this not as a way to critique
[Guest]: Indian religions per se, but as a way of critiquing colonialism, showing how the colonial authorities
[Guest]: try to reshape religions, erect strict boundaries around communities, formed these really as
[Guest]: kind of visualized communities and attributed to them, you know, in essence.
[Guest]: So some of this might have been done in a slightly more admiring fashion.
[Guest]: Other part of this project might have been done in a more denigrating fashion.
[Guest]: We have Orientalists who admired aspects of what they studied.
[Guest]: We have others who thought this was all just all terrible.
[Guest]: So there is one argument that is really strongly in favor of the colonial construction of Hinduism.
[Guest]: And those who study the pre-modern period find that no matter what you study, you can
[Guest]: always find some early antecedents for this.
[Guest]: You can find antecedents for a kind of Hindu consolidation if you study Indian philosophy,
[Guest]: for instance.
[Guest]: But there's a consolidation of the aspects, you know, against the Gnostics, for instance.
[Guest]: Well, why did this happen?
[Guest]: It's not something that's very immediately apparent, but it, you know, it could be that
[Guest]: having Muslim rulers or an Islamic presence indirectly kind of nudged a unification or
[Guest]: a consolidation of these philosophical schools.
[Guest]: So it's a perennial question that people are debating.
[Guest]: And one of the actual links between the pre-colonial and the colonial period is Persian, because
[Guest]: that's a bridged language and a whole kind of view on a cultural world that we find operating
[Guest]: seamlessly through the transition from pre-colonial to colonial rule.
[Amit Varma]: There's a fascinating book about this called, I think, The Truth About Us by Sanjay Chakraborty.
[Amit Varma]: And I also discussed it with Manu Pillay in an old episode where, yeah, I mean, the broad
[Amit Varma]: sense that I had of this period of time and how or what we know as Hinduism as a concept
[Amit Varma]: came about was that, look, the British land up in India and they don't understand the
[Amit Varma]: language.
[Amit Varma]: They don't understand anything.
[Amit Varma]: They want to make sense of a complex world.
[Amit Varma]: They need a simple narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Their early interlocutors are these upper caste Brahmins who give them their version
[Amit Varma]: of what how society is structured and the varna system is very much part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of one sided view, it forms a convenient narrative through which you view
[Amit Varma]: this exotic land and begin to navigate, you know, Indian society.
[Amit Varma]: And that becomes the narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And oddly enough, this mistaken narrative by, you know, our colonial rulers becomes
[Amit Varma]: the narrative that then seeps into all of our culture and gets widely accepted.
[Amit Varma]: And regardless of what the intent might be of the British, whether this was a deliberate
[Amit Varma]: way or and it played into the divide and rule or whether it was unwitting and they were
[Amit Varma]: just trying to what the hell makes sense of the world, how else could they do it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, but it strikes me while you were speaking just now that intellectual histories
[Amit Varma]: of a period like that must be way more complex than this period, because there are, again,
[Amit Varma]: so many languages in play.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I had no idea that Persian was such a big part of all of this.
[Amit Varma]: And is the Persian literature of the time then also playing a part in narratives like
[Guest]: this being built and propagated?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In the 18th century, there was more Persian being produced in India than in Iraq.
[Guest]: Again, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: It's hard to do justice to all the different languages.
[Guest]: You know, there was again, there was development and innovation in Sanskrit as well.
[Guest]: You know, there's one narrative that, you know, Sanskrit kind of like dies out.
[Guest]: There's nothing much new that's done in it.
[Guest]: But scholars have shown that the 18th century, far from being a kind of a period of darkness
[Guest]: and dissolution, was really a period of great cultural vibrancy at the time of political
[Guest]: crisis and turmoil also partly perhaps as a result of that.
[Guest]: So Persian is one aspect of it, and what I find that, you know, even after the colonial
[Guest]: government abandons it as an official language and abandons some of its earlier interest
[Guest]: in Orientalism and producing scholarship on India, they kind of, you know, this is like
[Guest]: more of the Macaulay influence that we see popping up.
[Guest]: It doesn't really die.
[Guest]: We have these generations of people who were educated in Persian.
[Guest]: They learned Persian because they also want to get jobs in the colonial administration.
[Guest]: And then they find it doesn't quite serve them as well.
[Guest]: But they're producing these books.
[Guest]: And with the growth of the Hindu public sphere, you have a lot of reformists who are translating
[Guest]: these Persian works into Urdu, because now Urdu is what is more commonly understood.
[Guest]: And these languages still don't have the kind of communal charges that they have today.
[Guest]: So again, although there was beginnings of the Urdu-Hindu controversy in the 19th century,
[Guest]: it doesn't always play out that way.
[Guest]: You know, in Punjab, for instance, loads of Hindus were learning Urdu, and part of the
[Guest]: education policy meant that Urdu really continued there for a long time.
[Guest]: So we have people who are proto-Arya Samajis, proto kind of part of groups that, the Sanatan
[Guest]: Dharm groups.
[Guest]: He has debates with each other, and these debates are in a very Persianized register
[Guest]: of Urdu.
[Guest]: And they're debating and talking about things that, you know, we'd really get into trouble
[Guest]: for if we were to debate or talk about these things today, but they're doing that.
[Guest]: There's just reels of really fascinating literature that would otherwise be ignored.
[Amit Varma]: And some of these intellectual currents that you're exploring, is it also driven by what
[Amit Varma]: is happening in modern times?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, both what you're talking about now and the whole Dara Shikoh book is
[Amit Varma]: very resonant with the sort of debates that are taking place today, our different sort
[Amit Varma]: of our ideas of ourselves, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: So is all of this driven by that and made more, and is that history or the writings
[Amit Varma]: of that time made more vivid for you because of sort of the world around us?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I would say that, of course, when I started on this path, we were not in our current political
[Guest]: scenario at all.
[Guest]: So that wasn't my initial impetus, but you know, definitely how can we are shaped by
[Guest]: our current times that affects how we view the past.
[Guest]: So it's, I'd say it's very, very difficult to step out of that.
[Guest]: You know, there's some more, of course, profound questions that I have that I didn't have when
[Guest]: I initially started on this path, which is, you know, of course, the ecological catastrophe
[Guest]: in one's thinking of what is really worth studying now, you know, with the Anthropocene,
[Guest]: with this ecological crisis, you know, what should we be doing with our lives?
[Guest]: What kinds of history are worth reading and talking about?
[Guest]: But I think it's not, you know, apart from the actual topic, I think just the very practice
[Guest]: of reading, critically interrogating, debating, discussing are incredibly important things
[Guest]: that we need to just keep doing, I'd say.
[Amit Varma]: I can agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Supriya.
[Amit Varma]: It's been a pleasure talking to you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline, probably online, and pick up The Emperor Who Never Was, Dara Shikoh in Mughal
[Amit Varma]: India by Supriya Gandhi, magnificent storytelling, and it'll give you a much better sense of
[Amit Varma]: the era that it covers.
[Amit Varma]: Supriya doesn't seem to be on social media, but you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: AMIT VARMA.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, what if you hadn't listened?
[Amit Varma]: What if?
[Unknown]: What if?